---
layout: post
title: 'Essay: Relating Morality and Improvement in David Hume’s Aesthetics'
author: 'David Heaney'
date: '6 April 2017'
imageurl: '/assets/images/painting-david-hume.jpg'
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;During the Scottish Enlightenment, many writers became concerned with questions of aesthetics and beauty (Broadie 280). Perhaps the foremost of the problems which they addressed, however, was an attempt to determine whether there is any “standard of taste”—a means by which one aesthetic judgement may be considered to be better than another (Hume 248). The literati found inspiration for addressing this question in many different sources: philosophical trends and religious views, in particular, influenced their perspectives. The majority were largely in agreement—most did believe that there was a standard of taste (Flynn 7)—but differed on smaller points. Although David Hume’s opinion on the subject—at least the opinion that he offers in his essay Of the Standard of Taste—fits broadly into the same category, his nuanced theory is separated from the rest. Hume’s aesthetic theory and those of his contemporaries share similar foundations and results, but, notably, his reasoning produces distinct philosophical and sociological artifacts. By analyzing the philosophical and historical contexts of the Scottish Enlightenment, it can been seen that Hume’s aesthetic theory provides a unique and specific perspective that ultimately influences his views of morality and the nature of social improvement.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The fingerprints of the English philosopher John Locke can be found throughout the Scottish Enlightenment’s search for a standard of taste. Having only been written a decade or two before the Scottish Enlightenment began (Friday 5), Locke’s Essay on Human Understanding quickly gained a foothold in Scotland’s intellectual circles. Locke’s views were introduced to Glasgow University by Francis Hutcheson (Friday 5), and they eventually “came to be seen as fundamental to the values of a polite society and to a proper education” (Phillipson 134). Related scientifically to Newtonianism and the discoveries of the seventeenth century, Locke’s theory was a comprehensive theory of the mind that provided a new perspective for thinking about art by relating our ideas to our experiences—to Locke, all of our ideas come either directly from experiences or from reflections upon our experiences (Hemingway 7, Friday 4-5). Importantly for the Scots, Locke’s philosophy eventually “dominated their intellectual orientation,” and their investigations into aesthetics were thus often a sort of defense or development of Locke’s theory (Friday 7-8).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The influence of Locke’s ideas can be seen in Hume’s writings on the standard of taste. It is ultimately from Locke, for example, that Scottish writers received the concept of the association of ideas: the ability possessed by one idea to bring up another idea (Friday 6). The concept of the association of ideas was used by Scottish writers to talk about how moral or aesthetic judgments could go awry (Friday 6), and this is exactly the sort of discussion that we find in Hume’s Of the Standard of Taste. Hume asserts that “A man in a fever would not insist on his palate as able to decide concerning flavours; nor would one, affected with the jaundice, pretend to give a verdict with regard to colours” (Hume 251). For Hume, ideas or experiences, in accordance with Locke’s theory of the mind, have the ability to negatively affect what we think about other ideas and experiences.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Likewise, and perhaps more importantly, it is from Locke that Scottish writers received the idea to separate “primary” and “secondary” qualities of objects. Whereas primary qualities include properties like size and weight, secondary qualities are those which stimulate ideas in the mind, like color (Friday 6-7). Notably, secondary qualities are subjective (Friday 7). Under the influence of Locke, Newton, and others, the writers of the Scottish Enlightenment began to wonder if beauty, like color, was a metaphysical, secondary quality (Flynn 6). This foundational idea is found in Hume’s writings; he clearly arrived at a decisive answer: “it be certain, that beauty and deformity, more than sweet and bitter, are not qualities in objects, but belong entirely to the sentiment, internal or external” (Hume, 252). Friday asserts that this sort of discussion is central to the Scottish Enlightenment’s development of aesthetics (7).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Locke’s writing also inspired one of the most fundamental questions in aesthetics: if all human thoughts are derived from experience, and if humans have different experiences, why do humans ever agree about what is beautiful? (Friday 8). Although one of the basic premises of Hume’s Of the Standard of Taste is that there is actually plenty of disagreement in taste, he doesn’t completely avoid addressing unanimity. He cedes that
> It is indeed obvious, that writers of all nations and all ages concur in applauding justice, humanity, magnanimity, prudence, veracity; and in blaming the opposite qualities… This great unanimity is usually ascribed to the influence of plain reason; which, in all these cases, maintains similar sentiments in all men, and prevents those controversies, to which the abstract sciences are so much exposed. (Hume 247).

He quickly counters this point-of-view, however, explaining that “we must allow that some part of the seeming harmony in morals may be accounted for from the very nature of language.” (Hume 247). His point is that everyone agrees that good things are good and that bad things are bad, but people start to disagree when they try to determine what is actually good or bad. Hume concludes that a standard of taste is required to mediate such differences of opinion (Noxon 159).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Further, the influence that Locke’s writings had on Hutcheson is contextually significant for understanding Hume. Hutcheson, too, was influenced by Locke’s conception of secondary qualities (Flynn 6). Indeed, he was the first writer to fully realize the potential that a Lockean account of the mind had for aesthetics (Hemingway 8). He wrote: “beauty is taken for the idea raised in us, and a sense of beauty for our power of receiving that idea” (qtd. in Hemingway 8). Thus, Hutcheson began a trend that led the writers of the Scottish Enlightenment away from a purely objective viewpoint of taste (Hemingway 8). In an attempt to avoid complete relativism in taste, however, Hutcheson maintained that humans possess a universal internal sense that causes agreement in matters of taste; for Hutcheson, this internal sense of beauty was stimulated by one thing only: uniformity amidst variety (Flynn 6-7). Flynn describes Hutcheson’s position succinctly: “if beauty is in the eye of the beholder, it is in the eye of every normal human beholder as he encounters uniformity amidst variety in geometric figures, pleasure gardens, or poetic meter” (6). For writers like Hutcheson, it was important to avoid relativism in taste because the Kantian separation of art and morality had not yet been developed: there was a common “intersection between the aesthetic and the ethical” during the Scottish Enlightenment (Friday 11). According to Flynn, the writers of the Scottish Enlightenment generally believed in the applicability of art to instruction in morality and piety: experiencing pleasure permitted men to value their own right behavior or understand the artistry of God in creation (9). Thus, while Locke provided new pathways for philosophical investigation, the pious were forced to wrestle the implications of his ideas.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hume ultimately reaches different conclusions than Locke and Hutcheson, and his perspective on morality is affected as a result. Despite the obvious general inspirations that Hume derived from Locke, Hume rejected Locke’s Essay on Human Understanding as a philosophical basis for finding the standard of taste (Jones 259). Hume believed that simply referring to a Locke’s theory—as others had done—could not answer questions of aesthetics, and he needed a stronger foundation to support his own opinions than what Hutcheson provided (Jones 259). Although he seems to believe in the importance of some sort of sense to explain the pleasure that beauty causes (Jones 261), he ultimately disagreed with Hutcheson’s conception of the internal sense (Flynn 7). This rejection of internal sense theory is significant because that sort of theory was common at the time; further, since internal sense theory was carefully and explicitly written to defend against relativism (Friday 8), Hume’s rejection of it once again put aesthetics in a morally precarious position. Another distinction that Hume made between himself and Locke and Hutcheson, a heavy reliance on the association of ideas as fundamental to reasoning, pushed him even further toward relativism (Hemingway 8, Flynn 14). Flynn notes that Hume’s use of the association of ideas “stops short of a radically subjective aesthetic theory,” and he suggests the possibility that Hume may have feared the political repercussions of developing his relativism any further (14).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The influence of the French, however, also kept Hume from slipping entirely into aesthetic relativism. Still requiring a “comprehensive theory of human nature,” Hume opted to rely on the writings of a French writer, the Abbe Jean-Baptiste Dubos (Jones 259). Hume famously lists five attributes in his description of true judges. Three of these—delicacy, lack of prejudice, and good sense—are derived “verbatim” from the writings of Dubos (Jones 267). The characteristics of true judges are foundational to Hume’s theory, and he spends nearly half of his essay explaining and justifying the importance of their cultivation; further, it is upon those characteristics that Hume founds his summative assertion in Of the Standard of Taste that “the taste of all individuals is not upon an equal footing” (Hume 258). In other words, Hume’s description of true judges leads him to conclude that there is some sort of standard of taste.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In addition to the writings of Dubos, the influence of French intellectual debate is also discernible in Hume’s writings (Jones 257). Many of the questions which Hume discusses in Of the Standard of Taste are derived from French writers: issues like the role of rules in making aesthetic judgements and the roles of the opinions of experts and the public came from France (Jones 259-260). He says that the foundation of the rules of composition “is the same with that of all the practical sciences, experience; nor are they any thing but but general observations, concerning what has been universally found to please in all countries and all ages” (Hume 249). Thus, Hume was able to address two of the French questions simultaneously; namely, Hume addressed the source of the rules of art by citing the importance of public opinion. Jones notes that “Hume’s debt to Dubos goes some way to explain why almost all of his own remarks on the arts are set in the framework of our social life” (260). It is important to Hume’s theory of aesthetics that there be a “possibility of publicly shareable viewpoints” (Jones 262). According to Jones, publicly shareable viewpoints, coupled with language conventions and universal human psychology, allow Hume to maintain the possibility for aesthetic objectivity (262). Ultimately, Hume addresses another French question, the importance of the opinion of experts, as he crafts his theory of true judges, and he seems to assign more weight to that part of his theory. He concludes that “the joint verdict of such” who possess his five properties of true judges “is the true standard of taste and beauty” (Hume 257). The influence of the French, therefore, provides tension against relativism in Hume’s theory.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hume’s reliance on Locke’s philosophy for inspiration, which was accompanied ultimately by a rejection of Locke’s and Hutcheson’s conclusions and a wide reading of the French, reveals a fascinatingly nuanced theory that carefully treads the line of moral and aesthetic relativism without completely crossing it. Unlike Hutcheson, Hume was unwilling to allow an internal aesthetic sense that could unite mankind’s opinions in the arts and morality. Despite his relativistic tendencies, however, he suggests that a standard of taste may still be discovered through the cultivation of the properties of his true judges. By considering this theory within the historical context of Scottish Enlightenment-era Edinburgh, insights into Hume’s perspective on the nature of society can be gleaned. Specifically, Hume’s theory asserts a commentary about polite society in Scotland that reflects his views about the ability—or the lack of the ability—that societies have to improve themselves.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Around the time of the Scottish Enlightenment, Britain—and Edinburgh in particular— was experiencing great change. The Enlightenment was intertwined with growing culture, wealth, leisure, and urbanization (Hemingway 4). Readers and reading materials proliferated, and they were accompanied by growing music and theatre industries (Hemingway 4). As far as the Enlightenment was concerned with aesthetic issues, it is not surprising that growing interest in art was matched by increased interest in understanding it (Hemingway 4). The Unions of 1603 and 1707, too, are crucial to understanding the historical and cultural contexts of the Scottish Enlightenment. Admittedly, the fact that the Scottish Enlightenment occurred after the Unions was a bit of a paradox: it’s odd that cultural and economic losses were followed by an age of improvement, and given that the famine that marked the end of the seventeenth century had just ended, it’s surprising that the Scots were willing to support an age of learning (Chitnis 11, 12). Noting the culturally-deprived position in which Scotland was left after the Union, Hume himself asked: “is it not strange, I say, that, in these Circumstances, we shou’d really be the People must distinguish’d for Literature in Europe?” (qtd. in Chitnis 12). Nevertheless, the Unions could be said to have forced the Scots to come into their own: in Edinburgh, new business was generated by:
> the building of New Town, in the generous funding of the town’s college and medical school, in judicious appointments made to chairs which enhanced the reputation of the college, and in the business of publishing the books of those men of letters attracted to their city, and in all the ancillary occupations involved in the printing, publishing and bookselling enterprise (Chitnis 12).

Likewise, the era was marked by education, literacy, and improvements in agriculture (Chitnis 13). More generally, the British middle class was enabled by its growing wealth and became more interested in artistic pursuits; it wished to cultivate its own sense of aesthetic taste (Flynn 7).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As far as Scotland is concerned, improvement came about in part due to the deliberate planning of elite clubs and societies in Edinburgh. Wishing to maintain a sense of identity and influence in society after the Union, the aristocracy in Edinburgh found purpose through the formation of such groups that promoted improvement. The first, the Rankenian, was formed in 1716 for the purpose of improving its own members (Chitnis 197). Other societies were formed in order to promote larger projects of improvement (Chitnis 196). The first of this latter kind, the Honourable the Society for Improvement in the Knowledge of Agriculture, was founded in 1723 and boasted 300 members. It’s purpose was to encourage the use of modern science as the foundation for agriculture in Scotland, but they eventually began pursuing a generalized agenda of economic improvement (Phillipson 131-132). The non-aristocratic classes, too, started forming groups (Phillipson 133). Lacking the weight of aristocratic responsibility, these literati found purpose in supporting the improvement efforts of the elite (Phillipson 135). There were clubs with “gentleman and artisans, whigs and jacobites, presbyterians and episcopalians, advocates and ministers, professors and doctors” (Phillipson 133). Chitnis notes that these clubs of the Scottish Enlightenment “institutionalised the informal acquaintance of people of different expertise and, in so doing, furthered the movement of which they were a part” (196). The groups of both classes—the aristocracy and the literati—believed that they could contribute to the improvement of society through their efforts (Phillipson 134).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;These groups allowed Edinburgh to foster a polite culture (Phillipson 133); indeed, the improvement sought by these groups was inseparable from their idea of politeness. The definition of politeness was wide: it was “an indispensable quality of civilized human life, the foundation of progress—in art, politics, religion, architecture, and all aspects of social experience” (Kingwell 365). Among other things, it helped foster social civity and identity (Kingwell 368). Such ideals were promoted within these groups as they sought to improve themselves and others through their conversations and debates (Kingswill 371). For some, polite culture necessitated the search for the standard of taste. Flynn quotes Hugh Blair as saying that
> when every one erects himself into a judge, and when we can hardly mingle in polite society without bearing some share in such discussions; studies of this kind… will appear to derive part of their importance from the use to which they may be applied in furnishing materials for those fashionable topics of discourse, and thereby enabling us to support a proper rank in social life (qtd. in Flynn 8).

Kingswell notes that the goal of polite culture was for politeness to “radiate a civilizing force outward, eventually to encompass society at large” (Kingswell 375). One such group, the Select Society, was particularly important. Claiming Hume, Adam Smith, and others as members, they discussed “the sort of sociological and aesthetic problems on which Hume had written and on which the others were soon to publish” (Phillipson 138). As a group, they aimed to improve themselves and their country (Phillipson 138-139). The club was concerned with promoting art, science, and “reading and speaking the English language in Scotland” (Chitnis 201). Members of the Select Society came from all social strata (Kingwell 365). Notably, polite culture is never far removed from the importance of aesthetic theory and the search for the standard of taste: it was thought that cultivating aesthetic taste could bring about civility (Flynn 7).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The efforts of these groups did eventually change the ideological status quo, but it was perhaps not always in the way they expected or desired. The benefits of the improvement efforts started to be seen by the 1740s and 50s (Phillipson 137, 141). By that time, the sons of those who had formed the clubs after the Union were taking their place in society (Phillipson 137). Due to the efforts of the previous generation, these aristocrats were wealthier, and their ideology was influenced as a result. Despite finding pride in its heritage of responsibility and successful improvement efforts, the new aristocracy opted not to patronize improvement as heavily and committed its wealth to travelling to England (Phillipson 141). In alignment with these new values, the new aristocracy opted not to form its own club, choosing instead to join the Select Society and Hume’s prestigious circle (Phillipson 138). Although they had scruples about being disloyal to the family tradition of improvement, the adoption of a particular political stance of Hume and the Select Society, determinism, quelled their misgivings (Phillipson 141). Citing Phillipson, Hemingway states that “the deterministic model of morality and social behaviour that was advanced in Hume’s writings… appealed to the fraction of the Scottish landed class associated with the Select Society, because it implied that the liberty and welfare of Scotland were ultimately beyond their control” (Hemingway 26). Thus, the aristocracy was able to find an ideology which allowed them to reject the necessity and efficacy of social improvement programs, and they could more conscientiously relieve themselves of their own responsibilities (Phillipson 142).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hume’s aesthetics are inseparable from social life (Jones 255), and his views on the former affected his views on the latter. Thus, it is not surprising that determinism set Hume and all who subscribed to it in opposition to polite culture, for Edinburgh’s polite society believed in the idea that people have free will and the ability to improve (Phillipson 135). In having this belief, the members of polite society were building onto Locke’s philosophy in the same way that Hutcheson did. Accepting the Lockean view of the mind, they agreed that humans are psychologically determined insofar as their perception of the world is dictated by the senses. Crucially, however, they “assumed, with Shaftesbury and Hutcheson, that in addition to possessing the five traditional senses of light, touch, hearing, taste and smell, man had a moral sense which allowed him to choose virtue and to eschew vice, to show public spirit or to relapse into selfishness” (Phillipson 135-136). In other words, they subscribed to Hutcheson’s conception of the internal sense, which Hume had rejected through his aesthetics and determinism. Insofar as determinism is related to aesthetics and morality, it isn’t surprising that it raised some religious issues. In a debate with the church, William Robertson cited Hume’s determinism to argue that luxury and success were necessary “evils” necessary for economic prosperity (Kingswell 378). Likewise, Phillipson asserts that “the imps of hell” was a term ascribed by clergy to Hume and to those who agreed with his deterministic values (Phillipson 142).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is through his aesthetics and determinism, therefore, that we learn that Hume’s view of societal improvement is limited. This limitation ought to be considered carefully, however, as it is obvious that Hume could not have been completely opposed to improvement: in an introduction to Of the Standard of Taste, Broadie suggests that:
> Hume plainly believed that we are not glued to the level of refinement of sensibility at which we find ourselves. One purpose of the essay is to describe what we have to do to move to a higher level. In that respect the essay might be seen as contributing to that search for improvement that so characterised the Enlightenment in Scotland (Hume 245).

If Philippson is correct, however, there are some forms of improvement to which Hume is opposed. It is possible that these two positions can still be reconciled. Hemingway notes that Hume’s conception of aesthetic progress applies only to the privileged classes (16). And given Flynn’s humorous note that Hume’s theory “stops short of a radically subjective aesthetic theory that would leave him on a level with his cook” (Flynn 14), it seems possible that Hume himself was prejudiced. Jones also hints that Hume may have been influenced by Dubos’ conception of the public as limited to those who already have experience with aesthetic judgements (Jones 265), which suggests that those who will be able to improve themselves are already far more advanced than the vulgar masses. Similarly, it has been argued that other social conditions are prerequisite to Hume’s conception of progress: Hemingway claims that, in Hume’s view, freedom and luxury are required (16). Only the right people are able to improve themselves, and even these are able to do so only if they are in the right circumstances.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While the majority of the Scottish Enlightenment’s writers who addressed aesthetics chose to pursue an objective standard of taste (Flynn 7), Hume’s views are much harder to effectively label. His nuanced, relativistic view of aesthetics, which is influenced by many writers, affects his view of morality. Likewise, his view of social improvement, which accompanies his aesthetics, is shaped by his determinism. Significantly, all of the strategies presented in Hume’s Of the Standard of Taste are qualified in some way (Friday 12), so there is a sense in which Hume himself was not able to come to a definitive conclusion. His nuanced view of social improvement, in relation to his aesthetics, becomes more difficult to discuss when social and personal prerequisites are borne in mind. Hume’s ultimate position on morality and social improvement may be difficult to define precisely, but it appears that they are at least related.

# Works Cited
Broadie, Alexander. “Art and aesthetic theory.” The Cambridge Companion to The Scottish
Enlightenment, edited by Alexander Broadie, Cambridge University Press, 2003,
280-297.

Chitnis, Anand C. The Scottish Enlightenment: A Social History. 1976. 4-42, 195-237
Flynn, Philip. "Scottish Aesthetics and the Search for a Standard of Taste." Dalhousie Review,
vol. 60, 1980, pp. 5-19.

Friday, Jonathan. “Introduction.” Art and Enlightenment: Scottish Aesthetics in the 18th Century,
edited by Jonathan Friday, Imprint Academic, 2004, 1-12.

Hemingway, Andrew. “The 'Sociology' of Taste in the Scottish Enlightenment.” Oxford Art
Journal, vol. 12, no. 2, 1989, pp. 3–35., [www.jstor.org/stable/1360354](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1360354).

Hume, David. “Of the Standard of Taste.” The Scottish Enlightenment: An Anthology, edited
by Alexander Broadie, Canongate Classics, 1997, 243-263.

Jones, Peter. “Hume’s literary and aesthetic theory.” The Cambridge Companion to Hume, edited
by David Fate Norton, Cambridge University Press, 1998, 255-280.

Kingwell, Mark. “Politics and the Polite Society in the Scottish Enlightenment.” Historical
Reflections / Réflexions Historiques, vol. 19, no. 3, 1993, pp. 363–387.,
[www.jstor.org/stable/41298976](http://www.jstor.org/stable/41298976).

Noxon, James. “Hume's Opinion of Critics.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, vol.
20, no. 2, 1961, pp. 157–162., [www.jstor.org/stable/427464](http://www.jstor.org/stable/427464).

Phillipson, Nicholas. “Towards a Definition of the Scottish Enlightenment.” City &amp; Society in
the 18th Century, edited by Paul Fritz and David Williams, The McMaster University
Association for 18th-Century Studies, 1973, 124-148.

# General Bibliography

Gracyk, Theodore A. “Rethinking Hume's Standard of Taste.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism, vol. 52, no. 2, 1994, pp. 169–182., [www.jstor.org/stable/431164](http://www.jstor.org/stable/431164).

Halberstadt, William H. “A Problem in Hume's Aesthetics.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism, vol. 30, no. 2, 1971, pp. 209–214., [www.jstor.org/stable/429539](http://www.jstor.org/stable/429539).

Jones, Peter. “Hume's Aesthetics Reassessed.” The Philosophical Quarterly (1950-), vol. 26, no.
102, 1976, pp. 48–62., [www.jstor.org/stable/2218804](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2218804).

Korsmeyer, Carolyn Wilker. “Relativism and Hutcheson's Aesthetic Theory.” Journal of the
History of Ideas, vol. 36, no. 2, 1975, pp. 319–330., [www.jstor.org/stable/2708930](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2708930).

Marshall, David. “Arguing by Analogy: Hume's Standard of Taste.” Eighteenth-Century Studies,
vol. 28, no. 3, 1995, pp. 323–343., [www.jstor.org/stable/2739452](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2739452).

Paxman, David. “Aesthetics as Epistemology, Or Knowledge Without Certainty.”
Eighteenth-Century Studies, vol. 26, no. 2, 1992, pp. 285–306.,
[www.jstor.org/stable/2739321](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2739321).

Shelley, James. “Hume's Double Standard of Taste.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism, vol. 52, no. 4, 1994, pp. 437–445., [www.jstor.org/stable/432031](http://www.jstor.org/stable/432031).

Shelley, James R. “Hume and the Nature of Taste.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
vol. 56, no. 1, 1998, pp. 29–38., [www.jstor.org/stable/431945](http://www.jstor.org/stable/431945).

Wieand, Jeffrey. “Hume's Two Standards of Taste.” The Philosophical Quarterly (1950-), vol.
34, no. 135, 1984, pp. 129–142., [www.jstor.org/stable/2219506](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2219506).
